duck

:For duck as a food, see Duck (food); for other meanings, see Duck (disambiguation).

Duck is the common name for a number of species in the Anatidae family of birds. The ducks are divided between several subfamilies listed in full in the Anatidae article. Ducks are mostly aquatic birds, mostly smaller than their relatives the swans and geese, and may be found in both fresh water and sea water.

Most ducks have a wide flat beak adapted for dredging. They exploit a variety of food sources such as grasses, aquatic plants, fish, insects, small amphibians  Photo of a duck eating a frog , worms, and small molluscs.

Ducks are sometimes confused with several types of unrelated water birds with similar forms, such as loons or divers, grebes, gallinules, and coots.

Many species of duck are temporarily flightless while moulting; they seek out protected habitat with good food supplies during this period. This moult typically precedes migration.

Some duck species, mainly those breeding in the temperate and Arctic Northern Hemisphere, are migratory; those in the tropics, however, are generally not. Some ducks, particularly in Australia where rainfall is patchy and erratic, are nomadic, seeking out the temporary lakes and pools that form after localised heavy rain.



Diving ducks and sea ducks forage deep underwater. To be able to submerge more easily, the diving ducks are heavier than dabbling ducks, and therefore have more difficulty taking off to fly.

Dabbling ducks feed on the surface of water or on land, or as deep as they can reach by up-ending without completely submerging.

Along the inside of the beak they have tiny rows of plates called lamellae like a whale's baleen. These let them filter water out of the side of their beaks and keep food inside.

A few specialized species such as the smew, goosander, and the mergansers are adapted to catch large fish.

In the Mallard the tongue is a flat plate, and on the tongue's back end is a short liftable flap with about 18 short spikes on for pushing struggling prey and other food down its throat.



The males (drakes) of northern species often have extravagant plumage, but that is moulted in summer to give a more female-like appearance, the "eclipse" plumage. Southern resident species typically show less sexual dimorphism.

Some people use "duck" specifically for adult females and "drake" for adult males, for the species described here; others use "hen" and "drake", respectively.



A worldwide group like the ducks has many predators. Ducklings are particularly vulnerable, since their inability to fly makes them easy prey not only for avian hunters but also large fish like pike, crocodilians,  and other aquatic hunters, including fish-eating birds such as herons. Nests may also be raided by land-based predators, and brooding females may sometimes be caught unaware on the nest by mammals (e.g. foxes) and large birds, including hawks and eagles.

Adult ducks are fast fliers, but may be caught on the water by large aquatic predators. This can occasionally include fish such as the muskie in North America or the pike in Europe. In flight, ducks are safe from all but a few predators such as humans and the Peregrine Falcon, which regularly uses its speed and strength to catch ducks.



The word duck (from Anglo-Saxon dūce), meaning the bird, came from the verb "to duck" (from Anglo-Saxon supposed *dūcan) meaning "to bend down low as if to get under something" or "to dive", because of the way many species in the dabbling duck group feed by upending (compare Dutch duiken, German tauchen = "to dive").

This happened because the older Anglo-Saxon words ened (= "duck") and ende (= "end") came to be pronounced the same: other Germanic languages still have similar words for "duck" and "end": for example, Dutch eend = "duck", eind = "end", German ente = "duck", ende = "end"; this similarity goes back to Indo-European: compare Latin anas (stem anat-) = "duck", Lithuanian antis = "duck", Ancient Greek νησσα, νηττα (nēssa, nētta) = "duck"; Sanskrit anta = "end".



Duck headcount in 2004
In many areas, wild ducks of various species (including ducks farmed and released into the wild) are hunted for food or sport, by shooting, or formerly by decoys. From this came the expression "a sitting duck", which means "an easy target".

Ducks have many economic uses, being farmed for their meat, eggs, feathers, (particularly their down). They are also kept and bred by aviculturists and often displayed in zoos. All domestic ducks are descended from the wild Mallard Anas platyrhynchos, except the Muscovy Duck

. Many domestic breeds have become much larger than their wild ancestor, with a "hull length" (from base of neck to base of tail) of 30 cm (12 inches) or more and routinely able to swallow an adult British Common Frog Rana temporaria whole.

Foie gras is often made using the liver of domestic ducks, rather than of geese.

Despite widespread misconceptions, most ducks other than female Mallards and domestic ducks do not "quack"; for example, the scaup makes a noise like "scaup", which its name came from.

A common urban legend says that quacks do not echo

, however this has been shown to be false.

Ducks have become an accepted presence in populated areas. Migration patterns have changed such that many species remain in an area during the winter months. In spring and early summer ducks sometimes influence human activity through their nesting; sometimes a duck pair nests well away from water, needing a long trek to water for the hatchlings: this sometimes causes an urgent wildlife rescue operation (e.g. by the RSPCA) if the duck nested somewhere unsuitable like in a small enclosed courtyard.

FAO reports that China is the top duck market in 2004 followed by Vietnam and other South East Asian countries.



In 2002, psychologist Richard Wiseman and colleagues at the University of Hertfordshire (UK) finished a year-long LaughLab experiment, concluding that, of the animals in the world, the duck is the type that attracts most humor and silliness; he said "If you're going to tell a joke involving an animal, make it a duck." The word "duck" may have become an inherently funny word in many languages because ducks are seen as a silly animal, and their odd appearance compared to other birds. Of the many ducks in fiction, many are silly cartoon characters like Daffy Duck (see the New Scientist article  mentioning humor in the word "duck").

In Mexico the word "Patito" (= "duckling") is used to refer to something unimportant, cheap, or generic.

in some silent cartoons. a picture of a duck is used to say "heads up".




The expression "quacks like a duck" is sometimes a short form for "It looks like a duck, it quacks like a duck, it swims like a duck, so it's a duck.", used as proverbial to counter abstruse arguments that something is not what it appears to be.

The expression is part of a conceptual framework for testing (see Duck test) of some computer systems. In a sense, this usage results from a need for 'behavioral' analysis of an entity (virtual or otherwise) in an attempt to know what it is or whether it is what is 'claimed' of it (by itself or another). One can even argue several philosophical points (see Operational definition). But, it's really in 'computing' where entities emerge (evolve) that are not 'covered' by theory or some known 'meta' view where this idea has taken hold, especially in forms related to advanced techniques. (As aforementioned though, very few ducks actually do "quack")
Moche Duck. Larco Museum Collection Lima, Peru.




*Some ancient Egyptian art depicts some ships of the Sea Peoples with ornamental prows shaped like a duck's head.

*In 2007, a duck in Tallahassee, Florida survived a gunshot wound and two days stored in a refrigerator whilst presumed dead.  The duck was operated on and was again presumed dead after a bad reaction to anesthesia. After further procedure the duck lived. 
*A rare genetic mutation sees some ducks born with four legs (ie six limbs): this is a type of polymelia.   
*The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature.  Benson, Elizabeth, The Mochica: A Culture of Peru. New York, NY: Praeger Press. 1972  They placed emphasis on animals and often depicted ducks in their art.  Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum. The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueológico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997.




Image:Duck_wings_outstretched.jpg|A Muscovy Duck stretching its wings in a freshwater spring
Image:Duck head.JPG|A Domesticated duck
Image:Brown Ducks.JPG|Some domesticated ducks
Image:Mallard_with_duckling.jpg|A Female Mallard with a duckling Mallard
Image:Comb duck.jpg|African Comb Duck
Image:duck-on-ground.jpg|Mallard drake
Image:ruddy.shelduck.arp.2.750pix.jpg|Ruddy Shelduck - not a true duck but a member of the Tadorninae
Image:Wood_duck_eclipse.jpg|Male Wood Duck in eclipse plumage
Image:Female Mallard.jpg|Female Mallard
Image:Mother duck with chicks.jpg|Female Mallard with ducklings
Image:Muscovy-duck-1.jpg|Male Muscovy Duck
Image:Mandarin.duck.arp.jpg|Mandarin Duck at Slimbridge Wildfowl and Wetlands Centre, Gloucestershire, England.
Image:Keralabackducks (75).JPG|Ducks in a pond
Image:Aa_ducks_and_geese_003.jpg|Ducks and geese in a yard in Manchester, UK
Image:Indian Runner Duck.jpg|Indian Runner Duck
Image:Ringed teal.gif|Ringed Teal
Image:Red-crested.pochard.slimbridge.arp.jpg |Red-crested Pochard
Image:Male_muscovy_duck_on_grass.jpg| Male Muscovy Duck
Image:Duck 3a.jpg




*Duck crossing
*Duck hunting
*Ducks Unlimited
*Domesticated duck — ducks kept as pets or show animals and for meat and eggs and down
*Duck pond
*List of fictional ducks
*Angel Wing - A disease common in ducks.




* www.culverduck.com 3rd Largest White Pekin Duck Producer in the United States with some history of the Pekin Duck, Preparation of Duck, and Duck Recipes
* "The quack doesn't echo" urban legend (from Snopes.com)
* Guide to keeping ducks
* Duck videos on the Internet Bird Collection
* Scientists Track Pintail-Duck Migration to Learn More About the Species' Population Decline
* Duck migration question
* Ducks Unlimited Conservation
* Raising Ducks, Geese & Swans
* Tufted duck (good for foreign names)
* list of books (useful looking abstracts)
* San Francisco Bay Area Duck Population
* Birds on the Brink (ruddy ducks' impact on white-headed ducks by crossbreeding in the wild)
*  - A modern illustrated guide to identification of US waterfowl.
* Duck Stock Photos

* Duck necrophilia Necrophilia among ducks ruffles research feathers
* World Poultry.net - information on duck production, breeding & health



Related Wikipedia Articles

Duck (food)
Duck (disambiguation)
Mallard
Animal
Chordate
bird
Anseriformes
Anatidae
Dendrocygninae
Oxyurinae
Anatinae
Aythyinae
Merginae
Anatidae
bird
Anatidae
swan
goose
fresh water
sea water
beak
dredging
Poaceae
aquatic plant
fish
insect
amphibian
worm
mollusc
water fowl
loon
grebe
Rallidae
coot
moult
bird migration
Northern Hemisphere
Australia
Diving duck
sea duck
Dabbling duck
Lamella (zoology)
baleen
smew
Common Merganser
merganser
Mallard
plumage
moult
sexual dimorphism
Esox
crocodilia
heron
mammal
fox
hawk
eagle
Muskellunge
Esox
Europe
predator
humans
Peregrine Falcon
Old English language
dabbling duck
Dutch language
German language
Old English language
Indo-European languages
Latin
stem (linguistics)
Lithuanian language
Ancient Greek language
Sanskrit
shooting
decoy
farm
duck (food)
Egg (food)
feather
down feathers
domesticated duck
Mallard
Muscovy Duck
Great Britain
Common Frog
Foie gras
liver
geese
Mallard
domestic duck
Greater Scaup
urban legend
MythBusters (season 1)#Does a Duck.27s Quack Echo.3F
wildlife rescue
RSPCA
courtyard
FAO
China
Vietnam
South East Asia
2002
psychologist
Richard Wiseman
colleague
University of Hertfordshire
United Kingdom
LaughLab
experiment
humour
joke
inherently funny word
languages
List of fictional ducks
cartoon
Daffy Duck
New Scientist
Mexico
proverb
Duck test
Operational definition
theory
end-user computing
Larco Museum
Sea Peoples
prow
Tallahassee, Florida
polymelia
Moche
Peru
Larco Museum
Thames and Hudson
Muscovy Duck
Spring (hydrosphere)
Domesticated duck
Mallard
Comb Duck
Mallard
Ruddy Shelduck
Tadorninae
Wood Duck
Muscovy Duck
Mandarin Duck
Manchester
Indian Runner Duck
Ringed Teal
Red-crested Pochard
Muscovy Duck
Duck crossing
Duck hunting
Ducks Unlimited
Domesticated duck
Duck pond
List of fictional ducks
Angel Wing
Snopes.com
ruddy duck
white-headed duck
crossbreeding
